Date: 2023-12-06 19:52

type: #post

# TL;DR
The design of this blog presents a lots of interesting tidbits of design and engineering to learn from. I should talk about them.

# Citations
Find a citation for ASCII escape codes and teletypes. Dylan Beetie's talk should have this.
Cite all crates
# Notes


# Draft
## TL;DR
Like most things that I write anymore, this blog is pure Rust, frontend and backend. The backend isn't anything super special: [Axum](https://github.com/tokio-rs/axum) + [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/) and deployed on [Shuttle](https://www.shuttle.rs/). All great pieces of technology and every easy to use. All of the interesting things are in the frontend, where I combine several things that are not meant to be be combined. The UI is a WASM module that combines [Ratatui](https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui) for TUI-based text renderings and [Yew](https://github.com/yewstack/yew) for general application scaffolding and browser interactivity.

## Backend Basics
When I say that the backend is basic, I do not mean that stack is basic. You can build amazing things with any single piece of the stack. Axum in particular is incredible and my favorite server framework in the Rust ecosystem. Rather, the backend is basic because its main job is to serve pre-parsed markdown documents. I discuss what I mean by "pre-parsed" a bit later on.

## The Vision
I have long wanted to put together a developer blog (about as long as I've been using Rust) but inspiration for its design had never stuck me...  until it did. I think it clear what I'm going for... its a TUI. I use (neo)vim and i3, greatly enjoy the text-based aesthetic, and practically live in the terminal. Once I had the idea, I couldn't let it go. 

Great, so this will be easy! I **only** need to pull blog post data from the backend, parse it, and display it as HTML! There are libraries to do all of that...

Great, but how much did I want to stick with other aspects of the terminal? While I would have been more than happy naviating the blog with just HJKL and/or arrow keys, mobile users would have other things to say. And what about the content itself? 

And, as is my want, it needed to be a full-stack Rust app. I was already comfortable with [[Yew]] for webapp UIs, so I just needed a w


Pull data in some format from the backend, parse it, and display

## The UI Stack
And there are libraries for those things: parsing "data", rendering text displays, rendering to HTML, and interacting with the browser. In fact, I already knew crates that did all of those things. Ratatui is a great, high-level crate for rendering text displays, and I've used Yew quite a lot, which is 3 of the 4 requirements. It was just a matter of gluing them together.

At a high level, these align fairly well. Ratatui provides a series of high-level widgets that can borrow strings for the renderings. These widgets are then rendered into an internal buffer and past onto a terminal "backend" to be displayed to the user. In the Yew model, this all happens in the rendering/view step. Once created, a Yew component can receive messages that update the component's state. The component can then communicate that the UI needs to be re-rendered.

The rendering step is where almost all of the bridging between the libraries occurs. Up until that point, this means the webapp can go about doing normal webapp things: setting everything up, fetching data from the backend, and processing that data as needed.

## All about Yew
As stated before, Yew components are updated through messages passing, but where do they get these messages? They can come from lots of sources, but most of the time, they are generated by callbacks that are called when a window event happens.

Linking callbacks to window events works in a similar way to how you would do things in JS. That's because, under the hood, you are doing things in JS. You can link a callback to a window event using the [web_sys](https://crates.io/crates/web-sys) crate. This manages the dirty work of communicating with the JS runtime and keeps you on the Rust side of the language barrier. While the API is far from ergonomic, it is easy to use once you get used to it, and it opens the door wide open to capturing interactions with the browser. Some interactivity, such as capturing window resize and scroll events, has to be done directly through `web_sys`, but...

Yew directly provides support for registering event to specific HTML elements. Often, this is done through their `html!`, which lets you embed HTML snippets into your Rust code. This provides an extremely easy to use API and is useful if, for example, you have an element that you want to provide on-click interactivity to.

With just Yew, I was able to get most of the way a functional blog. If I wanted a more traditional blog, I could have used it to get me the rest of the way.

## Webatui
To say that the browser is not a normal terminal is an understatement. Nevertheless, Ratatui provided just enough flexibility via their `Backend` trait to make it work. Conceptually, a terminal is *just* a grid of characters with each character potentially having its own formatting, and that's pretty easy to emulate.

Of course, an actual terminal is substantially more complicated, but we aren't working with a terminal. We're working with a browser. While browsers are even more complex; their mode of rendering UIs isn't because of ASCII escape codes used on teletype machines. With the tools provided by Yew, rendering a grid of characters to HTML will be fairly simple.

As a frame is being rendered, the "terminal" backend will populate its grid of characters. When the frame is done being drawn, the Ratatui `Terminal` will call the `flush` method on the terminal backend. This is where the HTML will be rendered.

The terminal backend has a row of characters for each line that can be rendered in the window. Each row gets rendered as a series of HTML `<span>` tags. The terminal backend scans a row and creates a span for each consecutive group of characters with identical formatting. These spans then get wrapped in a `<pre></pre>` tag. 

And with that, the terminal backend is done. The app can then copy this rendered HTML and pass it to Yew which will, in turn, display it. Ratatui and Yew and now talk to each other!

## The First Snag
Yes, the TUI and UI library can communicate, but only in simple terms. At this point, the only type of navigation that's possible is with the keyboard. While I would be happy to use HJKL and/or arrow keys to navigate, mobile users would be less than happy. So, how to support click interactivity?

With `web_sys`, we are about to get all mouse events, including movement, clicking, and more. We could do something really hacky like calculate what character in the grid was clicked on and then leave the app to determine what that character means. For obvious reason, this seemed like it would be prone to lots of errors and extremely cumbersome to work with. Besides, Yew provides a way to embed callbacks, it would be great if we could *just* use that.

Unfortunately (but reasonably), Ratatui doesn't support such a thing. We can sort of link state to a widgets (if it are a `StatefulWidget`), but this is more intended for internal calculation for the widget. No information about what widget is being draw or any linked data is passed to the backend.

In fact, the backend **only** has access to text and formatting data, so what if we use part of this formatting data as a flag that a span of text needs additional data? There are several formatting modifiers that I did not plan to support. If the terminal backend cannibalized one of them to mean "needs to be hydrated with data", then we can already detect this during the grid-to-spans parsing process. Once the spans are parsed out, a step can be added to provide the app an opportunity to hydrate pieces of text with data before being rendered into HTML.

In the updated flow, flushing the terminal backend just parses the character grid into plain and dehydrated spans and no HTML is rendered. To get the HTML, the terminal backend provides a `hydrate` method which takes a closure that will hydrate dehydrated spans with hyperlinks and on-click callbacks (and eventually more). The spans are then rendered into HTML, which is cached and a copy is given to the caller. The process of displaying this HTML is still the same.

## Bells and Whistles
With this new two-step rendering process in the terminal backend, interactivity abounds. You can switch blog tabs with your mouse or on your phone, you can load posts and projects by clicking their summaries, and links be embedded in writes and in the blog's footer. 

But there's more. When the window is resized, the terminal backend adjusts its grid of characters to fit the new screen and everything is re-rendered. The page scrolling is captured and used to move the in-terminal scrollbar (because it looks nicer than the browser's scroll bar). And, of course, arrow key-based movement persists. I have plans for more vim-like movements in the future, so, for now, a mouse will have to suffice.

## Page Data
There's one thing that I have yet to discuss, what format is used for the data that's used to display posts like the one that you're reading? I read these in markdown (in [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/)), so I wanted to be able to parse this markdown as well as any Rust code blocks and transform them into text rendering on all in the frontend.

For technical reasons (the syntax highlighting crate wouldn't compile to WASM), I could not perform all of that directly in the frontend. This was probably for the best as it reduced the final WASM module size. Still, I could not do all of the rendering on the backend. The frontend still needs to know how to format certain piece of text. How else would **bold** , *italicized*, and _underscored_ text be presented? More importantly, how could I provide syntax highlighting?!

Ultimately, the backend adopted the responsibility of parsing markdown pages into a markdown AST. For this, the backend uses the [markdown-rs](https://github.com/wooorm/markdown-rs) crate. Less than half of the full feature set is applicable to this project, so it provides the data in a minimal format, just enough for the frontend to render into text and nothing more.

For syntax highlighting, the backend uses the [syntect](https://github.com/trishume/syntect) crate. Now... I did not have a good experience with this crate. Just getting it to work was a larger headache that piecing together the entire Yew + Ratatui communication and render process. Still, its clear that the crate is well built (probably why its so widely used), and that my usecase is fairly far-afield from their standard usecase (I wanted only one syntax, Rust, and one non-default theme). But once I got it working, it plugged seamlessly into the parsing process with the markdown parser.

## Conclusion
Building the blog has been one of the most fun projects that I've done in a while. It required a good amount of engineering and tinkering, but I ran into relatively few large roadblocks. I can't wait to continue to share things on this blog, including the flag education series: Rust from First Principles.

If you are interested in the code base, you can find the repo for this project linked in the footer. If you are interested in using the "web terminal" backend, reach out. I'm considering making it in own crate.

Well, its been a pleasure. Same time next time?


# Write Up

## TL;DR
As is my want, this blog is a fullstack Rust project. The backend is very straightforward as its job is largely to just serve blog post documents, and it has a fairly straightforward stack: [Axum](https://github.com/tokio-rs/axum) + [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/) and deployed on [Shuttle](https://www.shuttle.rs/beta). All of the unique parts of the project are in the frontend. There, I combine  [Ratatui](https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui) and [Yew](https://github.com/yewstack/yew) for a texted-based, terminal-esque UI. This presented a series of fun and interesting challenges.

## Introduction
I'm on a mission with this blog. I want to change how people, especially other Rustaceans, think about Rust. I frequently see posts across social media platforms saying some variation of "I want to learn Rust, but I don't know what to build." To which many people recommend terminal applications, low-ish level projects, and web servers, all good and reasonable. But, at the heart of these questions and their responses, I think, is the idea that you should "use Rust as intended". After all, Rust is just a tool, and tools are geared to be used for a particular set of tasks.

The "intended usecases" of Rust is something that I plan to discuss a fair amount here because it shapes what we are willing to build (or at least willing to encourage get built). In all likelihood, you nor I nor (likely) any one person has a complete conception of what Rust is intended to solve, so I encourage you to explore a bit.

In my opinion, the ease with which you can render an idea into code (and visa versa) is what makes a language "good" for a particular application, and Rust excels at being expressive and portable. So, let's explore how far this idea can take us. I'll use this blog as a case study.

## The Vision
I've wanted to build a developer blog ever since learning Rust a bit more than 2 years ago. Building a blog is a rather simple task. Resources abound that help you build and deploy a blog. You can even do it directly through GitHub. While this sounds great, the general lack of constraint and my overall dislike of designing UIs made it hard to envision what I wanted for a long time. At least, until inspiration struck me: a TUI!

I practically live in the terminal and greatly enjoy the text-based aesthetic. My daily environment includes (neo)vim, i3, and a bevy of other terminal-based tool. So when I thought of this, I knew that I was going to have a great time build it. That said, a TUI that runs in your browser is clearly not an "intended usecase" for Rust. But why should I let that stop me? My rough idea at this point was to combine a web UI library with a TUI library and then praying that they could stick together somehow.

Well, you're reading this right now, so, clearly, it must of worked!

## The UI Stack
To start, I want to note that this is not a how-to or tutorial for any of the crates that I mention. They all have great examples and tutorials. If you feel inspired to build something after reading this (and I hope you do), start with their resources.

Since this blog is fullstack Rust, I knew that [trunk](https://github.com/trunk-rs/trunk) was a must. It auto generates all of the JS bindings your app needs as well as the HTML index file. For development, it can also watch your frontend crate for changes, compile it, and serve it. This makes for a great feedback loop while tweaking your code. Also, it allows you to forgo building a backend while you just trying to get a prototype working.

For the TUI part of the blog, I knew there were several libraries to help in rendering text-based UIs. I ended choosing [Ratatui](https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui)  because I knew it was relatively high level but almost nothing else. At that point, I was just hoping that I would be able to hack something together.

Once the text got rendered, it needed to be converted into HTML and served to the browser window. For this, I decided to use [Yew](https://github.com/yewstack/yew) because I had experience with it already.

With that, I was ready to start hacking around and hoping to come to some kind of revelation.

## Webatui
To say that the browser is not a normal terminal is an understatement. There is no `stdout`, so I needed a way to take the main renderer in Ratatui, the `Terminal`, and redirect any `stdout`-bound data somewhere else.

As luck would have it, the `Terminal` is generic over any type that implements their `Backend` trait. To start, I just wanted to get text in the browser, so I ignored everything that had to do with a cursor. This left me with a fairly short list of things that I needed to implement:
```rust
/// A simplified version of the Ratatui `Backend` trait
pub trait Backend {
    fn draw<'a, I>(&mut self, content: I) -> Result<()>
       where I: Iterator<Item = (u16, u16, &'a Cell)>;
    fn clear(&mut self) -> Result<()>;
    fn size(&self) -> Result<Rect>;
    fn window_size(&mut self) -> Result<WindowSize>;
    fn flush(&mut self) -> Result<()>;
}
```

Most of these methods are fairly simple. The `size` and `window_size` methods are easily accessible properties of the browser's window, and the `clear` method speaks for itself.

The `draw` method hints at a fairly intuitive, if naive, understanding of how terminal displays work: "its *just* a grid of characters". So, let's run with that. The "web terminal" would be internally represented by a grid of characters (actually a grid of characters + formatting info, but you get my point).

Lastly, the `flush` method is were all the magic happens. According to the docs, `flush` is called to, well, flush any buffered contents to the terminal screen. In the browser, this would amount to converting the grid of characters into HTML. The HTML rendering is where Yew comes in.

## All About Yew
Yew is a reactive, Elm-inspired framework. It models pieces of the UI through its `Component` trait, which has a series of optional methods that but everything we need can be done with just three methods:

```rust
/// A simplified version of Yew's Component trait
pub trait Component: Sized + 'static {
    type Message: 'static;

    fn create(ctx: &Context<Self>) -> Self;
    fn view(&self, ctx: &Context<Self>) -> Html;

	// Technically "optional", but we'll need it.
    fn update(&mut self, ctx: &Context<Self>, msg: Self::Message) -> bool { ... }
}
```

Notice the return type of the `view` method, `Html`. Yew provides a series of tools for working with virtual HTML nodes (VNodes), namely the `html!` macro. Now, I generally avoid macros whenever possible (yet another things that I will provide write a whole post about), but `html!` is something special.

The `html!` macro allows you to, more or less, embed HTML in your Rust code, but that's underselling it. It allows you to embed HTML in your Rust code in the same way that the `format!` macro allows you to embed string literals in your Rust code.

```rust
// This produces a header node that can be displayed in your browser!
html! {
	<h1> { format!("Hello, {}!", self.name) } </h1>
}
```

This is how the custom "terminal" backend will render its grid of characters into HTML when `flush` is called.

## The First Render
With that, I had pieced enough stuff together to take a simple example from Ratatui and hopefully display it in the browser. So far, it has been a fairly simple process, and it looks like we'll have a relatively smooth sailing for now. I *just* need to: build a backend for the web terminal, put together a simple component for Yew to render, use that component to render a Ratatui example into the web terminal, and display the HTML rendered by the web terminal.

The initial terminal backend was simple to build. It used a series of `<pre>` tags to render the lines of text. Once rendered, it caches the HTML for reuse. This means that displaying the HTML just means getting a copy from the cache.

The component was even easier. To start, it carries no data and never updates. The one issue is that rendering a frame requires a mutable reference to the `Terminal` but `Component::view` only provides a shared reference to the component. No problem, this is what `RefCell` was built for (there are ways around this, but, again, we're prototyping).

With that, we're done! This works! We've married two random libraries that were certainly not designed to go together. We have a single component that represents the terminal screen, which can be expanded to hold any data that's needed. Yew has support for updating that component and for doing so asynchronously. All that's left is to throw together a backend to store and fetch data, and we're golden, right? 

## The First Snag
No. Right now, we only support the barest intersection between terminals and browsers, displaying text. Unfortunately, most people expect to be able to interact with a web app especially with... the mouse.

Yew was built for the web, so it supports things like attaching callbacks to HTML tags for interactivity. Or even simpler, browser HTML supports hyperlinks. How can we add this kind of interactivity into the rendered HTML if Ratatui doesn't provide that data?

This stumped me, and I had it in the back of my mind for a couple of days. Then, it occurred to me. The `draw` method in the `Backend` takes an iterator over `Cell`s and their position. A `Cell` contains a character (technically a string but, for this usecase, a character) and some formatting information:
```rust
/// The Ratatui Cell
pub struct Cell {
    pub symbol: String,
    pub fg: Color,
    pub bg: Color,
    pub underline_color: Color,
    pub modifier: Modifier,
    pub skip: bool,
}
```

Most of this is very straightforward, but if part of the formatting data is unused, then it could be used to mark something as "in need of hydration" (in essence, it needs additional data before being rendered into HTML). From there, an additional step could be added to the rendering process in order to inject hyperlinks, callbacks, and other forms of interactivity.

Since I had decided to use the [base16](https://github.com/chriskempson/base16) approach to theming the blog, most of the color space is completely unused. A certain foreground/background color could be used as this flag, but this restricts the formatting options for interactable elements. Instead, I decided to use a part of the `modifier` field.

A `Modifier` is a bit field that communicates different formatting styles like marking text as needing to blink quickly or be reversed. There are several of these that I have no intention to use, let alone alone add support for. This avoids the clash from before, and exactly which modifier is used as the flag doesn't matter.

## Ending the Drought
With a system for flagging text as "needing hydration", the backend needs to change its rendering logic. It can't go directly from a grid of characters to HTML. Now, it needs to pause the rendering to allow for the component to provide additional data. This falls outside of the bounds of the Ratatui backend model, but that's fine. Ratatui has done its job well. It has rendered widgets into a field of text that will ultimately be displayed.

Instead of rendering the grid, `Backend::flush` will instead turn the grid into series of spans that note if it needs hydration. Something like this:

```rust
/// The spans used in the hydration process
enum TermSpan {
    /// The data is plain data and will be rendered in an HTML span tag.
    Plain((Color, Color), Modifier, String),
    /// The data might need to contain additional data, such as a callback.
    Dehydrated(DehydratedSpan),
}

/// A span that might need additional data such as a callback or hyperlink
#[derive(Debug, Default)]
pub struct DehydratedSpan {
    style: (Color, Color),
    mods: Modifier,
    text: String,
    // The container for the interactivity data, like the href for a hyperlink
    interaction: Interaction,
}
```

After the component has rendered everything via the Ratatui terminal renderer, it can call a method to hydrate those spans. This hydration will yield each dehydrated span to the component one-by-one and then render all the spans into HTML. The HTML is then accessed the same way as before.

And with that, we really do support everything we need to! You can click around the UI, change tabs, read blog posts, and use hyperlinks. Huzzah!
## Backend Basics
Ok, we're not quite done yet...

There still needs to be a place were we can fetch data from. A simple backend will suffice for this. Throw in a database for persistence, and it's mostly done. The backend just needs to support basic CRUD operations for the different types of content it holds (blog post, project summaries, homepage, etc).

But what is being posted? I write my notes, and by extension these posts, in [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/), which is just a bunch of markdown files. Ideally, I could give the backend a markdown document, and it would serve those to the frontend. But, displaying rendered markdown in a terminal-friendly way requires parsing that markdown. Also, what about syntax highlighting? What kind of dev blog doesn't have syntax highlighted code snippets??

Ok, so maybe the backend needs to do more than *just* store and serve data. Luckily, there are already libraries for parsing markdown and for syntax highlighting, [markdown-rs](https://github.com/wooorm/markdown-rs) and [syntect](https://github.com/trishume/syntect) respectively. Not everything in markdown can be rendered into an ASCII display, so the backend parses out only the supported parts from the markdown syntax tree. Any code blocks in that markdown are then parsed, highlighted, and stored in a collection of spans. This pre-parsed minimal markdown AST is what is then served to the frontend when it fetches a blog post or the like. That markdown is then turned into Ratatui widgets and eventually displayed as the text that you are reading.

## Wrap Up
When I hear people talk about what Rust is built for, this kind of project is not discussed. This is understandable. This is an odd, somewhat esoteric way of using the language... but should it be?

I'm not advocating that people build other terminal-esque blogs (how else would I be unique?), but I do believe that you should chase your bless. While the crates that I used to build this were not intended to be used together, they come together relatively easily and quickly (about a week), but, more importantly, I had a blast while doing it.

Rust, far more than any language I've used, is a joy to work with, and I think developers should get to use things that bring them joy. You can bring Rust to almost any domain, and that's where I think you should write Rust code.

Well, its been a pleasure. Same time next time?